The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Dying Indian's Dream: A Poem
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Dying Indian's Dream: A Poem


Author: Silas Tertius Rand

Release date: September 21, 2015 [eBook #50025]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Larry Harrison, Cindy Beyer, Ross Cooling and
        the online Project Gutenberg team at
        ttp://www.pgdpcanada.net with images provided by The
        Internet Archives-US


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DYING INDIAN'S DREAM: A POEM ***



Produced by Larry Harrison, Cindy Beyer, Ross Cooling and
the online Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
ttp://www.pgdpcanada.net with images provided by The
Internet Archives-US





                                  THE

                             DYING INDIAN’S

                                =DREAM.=
                                A POEM.

                         BY SILAS TERTIUS RAND,
                       Of Hantsport, Nova Scotia,
                   MISSIONARY TO THE MIC-MAC INDIANS.

                      (_THIRD EDITION, REVISED._)

                   With some Additional Latin Poems.


                            WINDSOR, N. S.:
                            _C. W. KNOWLES_.
                                  1881




                     PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

THE WIGWAM SCENE described in the following pages, occurred at
Hantsport, Nova Scotia, in March, 1855. In the Sixth Annual Report of
the Mic-Mac Mission, in a letter written immediately after the event, I
find it thus described:

“An event of some interest has just occurred here. One of our sick
Indians, named John Paul, has just died, and was buried to-day. I have
taken from my first acquaintance with him, a great liking to him. I have
spent many an hour with him in his wigwam. He always listened
attentively to the Scriptures, and engaged readily in religious
conversation, and I have not been without hope that the grace of God had
taken possession of his heart. Efforts were made to deter him from
allowing my visits; but they were unavailing. I never aimed so much to
attack his Romish errors directly, as to dwell upon the free salvation
of the Gospel—without money and without price. About last New Year’s
Day, while I was in Halifax, I was informed that the Romish priest had
sent orders to him to leave Hantsport, and had threatened him with all
the curses of the Church if he remained. His statement to me when I
returned, was: “I won’t leave this place till I choose. It is not in the
power of any man to keep me out of Heaven. That is a matter between God
and my own soul.” He said in Indian: “_Neen alsoomse._” “I am my own
master.” He remained. He continued to listen to the Bible with
attention, and to receive my visits with kindness and respect till he
died. I now recollect that when I came to read to him, he would send the
small children away, so that we might not be disturbed. The last time I
saw him was a precious season to my own soul. It seemed easy to speak of
the Great Redeemer, and of the way of Salvation. I may say that special
prayer was made for him in the Meeting House, where a number of
christian friends were assembled on the day before he died, holding a
special prayer meeting on our own account. More than one fervent prayer
was offered up for the dying Indian. After the meeting I returned to my
own house, where I met an Indian from John Paul’s wigwam, who informed
me that the poor fellow was near his end. “But oh,” said he, “he is
wonderfully happy! He says he is going right to heaven, and that he has
already had a glimpse of that bright happy world. He has been exhorting
us all, and telling us how easy it is to be saved. He dreamed last night
that he was in heaven. Heaven seemed to him to be an immense great
palace, as large as this world, all formed of gold. He saw there the
glorious Redeemer, surrounded by an immense Host of Saints and Angels,
all drest in white. As he entered he thought they gathered round him and
shouted: JOHN PAUL has come! =John Paul= has come!” The poor
fellow did not die until the following morning, and just before he died
he looked up towards heaven, and declared that he saw the angels, and
the Glory of God. He was astonished that the others could not see what
he saw. He wanted them to hold up his children, that they might see the
wonders that he himself saw. He then sank back on his pillow and quietly
expired.

It will be thus seen that the following Poem is not a work of _fiction_.
It aims to relate—with some license of imagination, of course, else it
would not be poetry—a plain historical fact. The description of Paul’s
skill and knowledge as a hunter, and in managing their frail little
water-crafts in a sea, is literally true of many of the Indians, and was
true of him. His peace of mind in committing his family into the hands
of God, after he found himself disabled, having burst a blood vessel by
carrying a large load, from which he never recovered—he related to me:
and this is expressed in the prayer put into his mouth at the close,
“which we did not fully _hear_ or _share_.”

It may be added that after the Poem was written, I read it to the Indian
who gave me the account of John Paul’s death, and as he spoke the
English language well, he had no difficulty in understanding it. And he
assured me that it described the scene correctly.

I may add that the _measure_—or rather the utter disregard of all
regular measure—was suggested by an old poem I saw somewhere,
describing a very different scene, and the “wildness” of it appealed to
me to be just suited to a scene of the _Wilderness_ and the _wigwam_.

It will not surely be deemed a very great stretch of “poetic license” to
represent oneself as an eye- and ear-witness of a scene, with the
surroundings of which he was so familiar, and which had been so vividly
described by those who really _were_ present.

Nor need we speculate about the cause of dreams or their significance.
No one will deny that they may be a very exact index of the state of
mind at the time, of the one who dreams. And the earnest prayer of the
writer, is, that the reader of these verses, and himself, may be, at the
time of our departure, so full of joy and peace in believing, that
whether waking or dreaming, we may “rejoice with that joy which is
unspeakable and full of glory, receiving the end of our faith, even the
salvation of our souls.”

                                                        SILAS T. RAND.
  Hantsport, N. S.




[Illustration]




                       The Dying Indian’s Dream.




               “Jesus, the vision of thy face,
               Hath overpowering charms;
               Scarce shall I feel Death’s cold embrace,
               If Christ be in my arms.
               Then when you hear my heartstrings break,
               How sweet my minutes roll;
               A mortal paleness on my cheek,
               And glory in my soul.”—_Watts._




                                   I.

  Upon his bed of clay,
  Wasting away,
  Day after day,
  A sick and suffering Indian lay:
  No lordly Chieftain he,
  Of boasted pedigree,
  Or famed for bravery
  In battle, or for cruelty;
  He was of low degree,
  The child of poverty,
  And from his infancy,
  Inured to hardship, toil and pains;
  He was a Hunter, bold and free,
  Of famed ACADIA’S plains.
  He’d roamed at will,
  O’er rock and hill,
  And every spot he knew,
  Of forest wide,
  Of mountain side,
  Of bush and brake,
  Of stream and lake,
  Of sunny pool and alder shade,
  Where the trout and the salmon played,
  Where the weeping willow wept,
  Where the whistling wood-cock kept,
  Where the mink and the martin crept,
  Where the wolf and the wild-cat stept,
  Where the bear and the beaver slept,
  Where the roaring torrent swept,
  Where the wandering woodman strayed,
  Where the hunter’s lodge was made,
  Where his weary form was laid;
  Where the fish and the game abound,
  Where the various kinds are found,
  Every month the Seasons round:
  Where beetling bluffs o’er hang the deep,
  Where laughing cascades foam and leap,
  Dancing away from steep to steep:
  Where the ash and the maple grew,
  Where the hawk and the eagle flew,
  Sailing in the azure blue.
      With matchless skill,
  He could hunt and kill,
  The moose and the carriboo,
  And smoothly ride
  On the rolling tide,
  In the light and frail canoe;
  Though in angry gusts the tempest blew,
  Though the thunders roared,
  And the torrents poured,
  And the vivid lightnings flew;
  With a noble pride,
  Which fear defied,
  With steady hand and true,
  The fragile skiff
  By the frowning cliff,
  He could steadily guide,
  And safely glide,
  In joyful glee,
  Triumphantly,
  The roaring surges through.


                                  II.

      And many a weary day,
  He had toiled away,
  In his own humble home,
  At basket, bark, and broom,
  To gain the scanty fare,
  Doled out to him grudgingly, where
  His ancient sires,
  Kindled their fires,
  And roamed without control,
  Over those wide domains,
  Rocks, rivers, hills, and plains,
  In undisputed right, lords of the whole.
  But ah! those days were gone,
  And weeks and months had flown,
  Since dire disease had laid him low;
  Nor huntsman’s skill,
  Nor workman’s will,
  In want, in danger, or alarm,
  Could nerve his powerless, palsied arm,
  Or bend his useless bow.
  But God was there,
  And fervent prayer,
  To Heaven ascended,
  And sweetly blended
  With angel’s song,
  From Seraph’s tongue;
  And Joy was there, and Hope, and Faith,
  Triumphing over pain and death;
  The Light of Truth around him shone,
  Auspicious of the brighter dawn;
  He trusted in the living God,
  As washed in Jesus’ precious blood:
  No dread of death or priestly power,
  Could shake him in that fearful hour,
  Nor tyrant’s rod.
  The fluttering breath from his palsied lung,
  No utterance gave to his quivering tongue;
  But still his ear
  Was bent to hear
  The Words of Truth and Love;
  His flashing eye
  Glanced toward the sky,
  And he whispered, “I shall die;
  But God is Love; There’s rest above.”


                                  III.

      He slept! the dying Indian slept!
  A balmy peace had o’er him crept,
  And for the moment kept
  His senses steeped
  In calm and sweet repose,—
  Such as the dying Christian only knows.
  Consumption’s work was done;
  Its racking course was run;
  His flesh was wasted, gone;
  He seemed but skin and bone,
  A breathing skeleton—
  Deep silence reigned—no sound,
  Save the light fluttering round
  Of scattered leaflets, found
  Upon the frozen ground,
  And the gently whispering breeze,
  Soft sighing through the trees,
  Was in the wigwam heard;
  The voice of man, and beast, and bird,
  Were hushed—save the deep drawn sigh,
  And the feeble wail of the infant’s cry,
  Soothed by the mother’s sobbing lullaby,
  And bursts of grief from children seated nigh,
  Waiting to see their father die.
  Kindred and friends were there,
  Gathered for prayer,
  To soothe the suffering and the grief to share;
  And Angel Bands were near,
  Waiting with joy to bear
  A ransomed spirit to that World on high,
  That “Heaven of joy and love, beyond the Sky.”


                                  IV.

  He dreamed! the dying Indian dreamed!
  Flashes of Glory round him gleamed!
  A bright effulgence beamed
  From on high, and streamed
  Far upward and around; it seemed
  That his work on earth was done,
  That his mortal course was run,
  Life’s battle fought and won;
  That he stood alone,
  Happy, light and free,
  Listening to sweetest melody,
  And softest harmony,
  From the etherial plains,
  In loud extatic strains,
  Such as no mortal ear,
  Could bear, or be allowed to hear.
  When suddenly to his wondering eyes,
  Upstarting to the skies,
  A glorious Palace stood;
  All formed of burnished gold,
  Solid, of massive mould,
  The bright Abode
  Of the Creator God!
  Ample, vast and high,
  Like Earth, and Sea, and Sky,
  The Palace of the King of kings,
  Where the flaming Seraph sings,
  Waving his golden wings;
  Where the ransomed sinner brings,
  Honour and glory to the Eternal Son,
  Casting his dazzling crown,
  In lowly adoration down,
  Before the blazing Throne,
  Of the Eternal Three in One.
  But oh! what rapturous sounds!
  A shout through Heaven resounds!
  Myriads of happy spirits, robed in white,
  More pure and bright
  Than the noonday light,
  Are standing round the Throne,
  Of the Eternal One.
  Every eye upon him turns,
  Every breast with rapture burns,
  And trembles the lofty Dome,
  As they shout him welcome home—
  “JOHN PAUL has come! JOHN PAUL has come!”


                                   V.

      He woke! the dying Indian woke
  Opened his eyes and spoke:
  A heavenly radiance broke
  From his bright beaming eye,
  And with a loud exultant cry,
  And clear ringing voice,
  In the soft accents of his native tongue,
  And in glowing imagery,
  Suited to the theme,
  Like that of the Immortal Dreamer’s Dream,
  In Bedford’s mystic “Den,” whose fame,
  He’d never heard, nor knew the “Pilgrim’s” name,—
  Or that Sublimer Song,
  By John of old, in Patmos’ Prison sung,
  To the Celestial Throng;—
  Whose dazzling visions of the Throne,
  He’d never read, or heard, or known;
  He told the visions of his head,
  While slumbering upon his bed;
  And spoke of those unutterable joys
  Prepared on high,
  Beyond the sky,
  For sinners saved in Jesus when they die.


                                  VI.

      With mute amaze,
  And earnest gaze,
  Seated round his cot
  Entranced, and to the spot
  Enchained, we listen to the story,
  Catching glimpses of the glory;
  As though the echoing roll
  From the Eternal Hill,
  In soft vibrations broke,
  Upon our senses while he spoke,
  Sending through every soul,
  A deep unutterable thrill!
      “Oh! I have been in Heaven!”
  To me it has been given
  To see the Throne of Light,
  And Hosts of Angels bright,
  And Ransomed Spirits robed in white;
  They knew my name,
  And who I am,
  And whence I came;
  I heard them loud through heaven proclaim:
  “Make room! make room!
  JOHN PAUL has come! JOHN PAUL has come!”
  Bear the glad tidings far
  As the remotest star!
  Let every tongue
  The shout prolong!
  Sound the Redeemer’s praise,
  In loudest, loftiest lays!
  Your noblest Anthems raise
  To everlasting days,
  To Him who bought him
  With His precious blood;
  To Him who brought him
  To this bright Abode
  Of perfect blessedness,
  And everlasting peace,
  “The Bosom of his Father and his God.”


                                  VII.

  “Oh! I shall surely reach that place,
  Through matchless grace!
  One moment more below
  I linger, then I go,
  From this dark world of woe,
  Where floods of sorrow overflow,
  To those bright beauteous Plains,
  Where Glory everlasting reigns:
  That Land of heavenly Rest,
  Among the Pure and Blest,
  Where Jesus is—where I
  Shall never sin again or sigh;—
  In that bright World on high,
  There are no stains
  Of sin, and no remains
  Of sorrow, sighs, and pains;
  But pure and perfect happiness,
  And royal robes of heavenly dress,
  I shall eternally possess:
  Where holiness and peace
  Never to cease,
  But ever to increase,
  Abound—ah yes! this Bliss,
  Which I shall there possess,
  In all its glorious blessedness,
  Forever and forever reigns,
  O’er all those wide extended plains.”

      “Oh! I must meet _you_ there,
  My brothers! you must share
  That Blessedness with me,
  So wonderful, so free;
  That Mansion in the skies,
  Not bought with gold or price,
  But with the precious blood,
  Of Christ, the Lamb of God,
  Who died on Calvary’s bloody tree,
  In pain, and bitterest agony,
  To set us guilty sinners free,
  From all our sin and misery.
  Oh! wondrous Love! that _we_, even WE,
  Despised, degraded, though we be,
  In wretchedness and poverty,
  May find Redemption in his Name,
  That rich Inheritance to claim,
  With yonder blood-washed company,
  All robed in spotless purity,
  And Joy, to all eternity.”
      “Oh! listen to the Great Redeemer’s voice,
  Receive His Word, make Him your choice,
  Trust in His Name, and in His Love rejoice,
  Forsake all sin, repent, and be forgiven,
  Then I shall meet you all again in Heaven.”


                                 VIII.

      He ceased—his word, no longer heard,
  Through every chord, our souls had stirred.
  The glistening eye, gave back reply,
  Then rose on high, the heart-felt cry:
  Lord, grant that I, when called to die,
  May thus be blessed, from pain released,
  As Heavenly Guest, with Thee to feast:
  Oh! be Thou near, my soul to cheer,
  That doubt and fear, may disappear,
  That joy and rest, may fill my breast,
  That visions bright, of heavenly light,
  Like his to-night, may cheer my sight.
  Should quiet sleep my senses keep,
  And Fancy leap the pathless steep,
  Where whirl the streams of airy dreams,
  With glittering gleams, of heavenly beams,—
  Oh! may I in fit frame be found,
  To dream of “Angels hovering round,”
  And “leave the world without a tear,
  Save for the friends I hold so dear.”
  Or should fierce pains forbid to sleep,
  May I amid the anguish deep,
  When shuddering death-chills o’er me creep,
  And friends around me mourn and weep,
  Be buoyed above the waves’ wild sweep,
  Where bursting billows roar and leap;
  And hear the ‘whispering angels’ say,
  “Sister Spirit, come away;”
  And borne on Faith and Fancy’s wing,
  Still hear them as they shout, and sing,
  “My ears with sounds seraphic ring,”
  My soul through all its mystic springs,
  Thrill like a Harp’s harmonious strings,
  Defiance at the foe to fling;
  That I may shout, exult, and cry:
  “Lend, lend, your wings! I mount, I fly!”
  “Oh! Death, where is thy victory!
  Oh! Death, where is thy sting!”
  My faith has triumphed over thee,
  A conquered _captive_, not a _king_:
  “Jesus can make a dying bed
  Feel soft as downy pillows are;
  Here on His breast I lean my head,
  And breathe my life out sweetly there.”


                                  IX.

      We watch the dying man meanwhile,
  His face all radiant with a smile;
  His lips still move, as if in prayer,
  A prayer we may not fully share;
  But One is near, whose gracious ear,
  The deep unuttered groan can hear.
  Nor need we doubt or judge amiss,
  What the heart’s inmost yearning is.
  The quivering lip, the tearful eye,
  Can well attest the earnest cry,
  Of the stirred soul’s deep agony;
  And taught of God, we join the prayer,
  We may not fully hear or share.
  Our eyes and hearts to Heaven we raise,
  While thus the dying Indian prays:—
      “God of eternal Love,
  Look from Thy throne above,
  Bow down thy gracious ear,
  My dying prayer to hear;
  Fulfil Thy promises,
  Thy promises to bless
  The widow and the fatherless.
  Grant this last boon I crave!
  May they have bread when I am dead,
  And by thy bounty still be fed,
  When I am in my grave.
  Better than earthly father’s care,
  Oh! may they in thy goodness share!
  Grant them all needed good;
  For soul and body, food;
  And may thy mighty arm,
  Protect them from all harm.
  I leave them at thy call,
  Mother and children all:
  Oh! let no fears appal!
  And let them never fail or fall!
  I trust them, Lord, to Thee,
  Thou wilt their Father be,
  For time and for eternity.
  Thy promises are sure,
  The needy, helpless, poor,
  Though crushed to death and dust,
  May in Thy goodness trust,
  And rest upon thy Word,
  Thou ever blessed Lord!”
      “Oh! bless my people! bless
  Them in their helplessness!
  Their poverty and wretchedness,
  Their misery and distress.
  Bless the whole Indian race!
  That they may know thy grace!
  Do thou their hearts prepare,
  That they may freely share,
  Those blessings rich and rare,
  That from the Gospel flow,—
  Salvation here below,
  At all times trusting Thee, and go
  To that bright World on high,
  Of Glory when they die;
  That they may shine,
  In Love divine,
  And with Thee rest
  Forever blest!”


                                   X.

      Now droops his weary head
  Exhausted on his bed.
  His dying prayer has ceased;
  Convulsive heaves his breast;
  We deem him sunk to rest,
  Breathing his _last_ and _best_;
  When suddenly his eyes
  He opens on the skies,
  And startling us with surprise,
  He waves his hand and cries:
  “I see, I see the place!
  I see my Saviour’s face!
  Look, children, look! your eyes
  Raise, and look toward the skies!
  Bright beams of Glory
  Come hovering o’er me!
  See! see! they’re opening wide,
  The flaming gates of Paradise!
  Bright angels downward glide,
  And standing near my side,
  They smile and bid me come,
  To my eternal home.”


                                  XI.

      He dies, the happy Indian dies,
  Closes his eyes to earth, and flies
  Up to the regions of the skies.
  Angelic legions lead the way,
  To the portals of celestial day.
  Wide spreads the news, all Heaven rings,
  Angels and ransomed spirits wave their wings,
  All lowly bending to the King of kings;
  Mingling their loftiest harmonies,
  Their sweetest, softest melodies,
  High Heaven’s eternal Minstrelsies,
  With harp and voice and choral symphonies,
  Loud as the sounding of ten thousand seas!
  They shout him welcome to his heavenly Home:
  “JOHN PAUL has come! JOHN PAUL has come!”
  Bear the glad tidings far
  As the remotest star!
  Let every tongue,
  The shout prolong!
  Sound the Redeemer’s praise,
  In loudest, loftiest lays!
  Your noblest anthems raise
  To everlasting days,
  To Him who bought him
  With His precious blood,
  To Him who brought him
  To this bright Abode
  Of perfect blessedness,
  And Everlasting Peace,
  “The Bosom of his Father and his God!”


                                  XII.

      Oh! Bliss Immortal! hail! all hail!
  All glory, honour, to the Lamb who died!
  Now seated glorious at His Father’s side.
  Sound through the Universe his Name!
  His matchless Love his Fame proclaim!
  Till all His foes are put to shame.
  And let the Story of the Cross prevail
  O’er every Mountain, Island, Hill, and Dale,
  Of the wide world, and satan’s power destroy,—
  The wondrous news thrill every heart with joy—
  Wafted on every breeze, by every swelling gale,
  Till sin and suffering, shame and sorrow fail;
  ’Gainst Love Omnipotent no force prevail;
  Till all His foes subdued shall bow the knee,
  To Him who died on Calvary’s bloody tree,
  For lost and guilty men, of every race,
  Of every nation, station, time and place.
  Oh swell the joyful notes of Jubilee!
  The year of Grace! the year of Liberty!
  Burst! burst! ye prison bars! let Man be free!
  HE died for all, of every tribe and hue,
  Anglican, Indian, Ethiop, Greek and Jew.
  All, all are welcome! wide heaven’s gates expand;
  _There_ every name is known from every Land,
  _There_ burst Hosannas, Heaven’s loud acclaim,
  O’er every new-arrived, his name they name.
  While all the blood-washed Throng,
  In accents loud and long,
  Their rapturous joy proclaim,
  Shouting and singing, Glory to the Lamb!
  All praise to Him who sits upon the Throne,
  Who rules the Universe, the Lord alone!
  Jehovah, Jesus, Saviour, Great I AM!
  To Him who bought us
  With His precious blood;
  To Him who brought us
  To this Bright Abode,
  Of perfect Blessedness,
  And Everlasting Peace,
  “The Bosom of Our Father and our God!”

[Illustration]




                         =Latin Translations.=


    =[The following attempts at a translation of a couple of Psalms,
    and some of our beautiful Evangelical Hymns into Latin, will
    interest those who are acquainted with that noble old Tongue;
    more especially if they are at all conversant with the Latin
    Hymnology and methods of versification of what are designated
    the _Middle Ages_.]=






                             Psalmus XXIII.




                   1.   Est Jehova Pastor meus,
                        Meus Dominus et Deus,—
                        Ego impotens et reus—
                                   Ergo non carebo.
                        Suam ovem stabulatque,
                        Prata graminosa datque.
                        Rivis placidis lavatque,
                        Illuc ducit, propinatque;
                                   Itaque valebo.

                   2.   Animamque reportavit
                        Meam, saepe recreavit;
                        Me quaesivit et servavit,
                                   Optimus Curator.
                        Vüs rectis, praeparatis,
                        Aequitati consecratis,
                        Ducit Deus bonitatis,
                        Propter suum nomen gratis,
                                   Ductor et Salvator.

                   3.   Transeam caliginosa
                        Loca, et calamitosa,
                        Dura, dira, luctuosa,
                                   Hostes et obstantes;
                        Non formido aerumnosa
                        Mala, tetra, dolorosa;
                        Gaudens fero lacrimosa,
                                   Inter Te amantes.
                        Confidenter ibo Tecum;
                        Nam Tu semper eris mecum;
                        Tua virga, tuum pedum,
                                   Ample consolantes.
                   4.   Mensam mihi preparasque,
                        Coram hostes, panem dasque;
                        In clementiâ prope stasque:
                                   Mea pax abundat:
                        Sanctum oleum benignum,
                        Super caput tam indignum
                        Meum fundis,—clarum signum:
                                   Meum vas redundat.

                   5.   Immo bonitas divina,
                        Valetudo genuina,
                        Cum clementiâ supernâ,
                        Et benignitas aeterna,
                                   Semper me sequentur.
                        Dum in vita remanebo,
                        Dei gratiâ gaudebo:
                        Ejus domum habitabo,
                        Ejus nomen collaudabo,
                                   Et indesinenter.




                               Psalmus C.




              1.   In Jehovam vos ovate,
                   Et gaudete, et cantate,
                              Omnes terram habitantes.
                   Laeti Dominum, servite,
                   Et cum gaudio gestite,
                              Coram Illum triumphantes.

              2.   Nostrûm Deus est Creator,
                   Dominator et Salvator,
                              Deus unus, Auctor rerum:
                   Fecit nos, et nos nutrivit,
                   Regit, tutat, repetivit,
                              Oves perditos ad Herum.

              3.   Ejus portas introite;
                   Claris laudibus adite;
                              Illum Dominum clamantes:
                   Illum bonum, semper verum,
                   Fidelissimumque Herum,
                              In eternum adorantes.




                        “Nearer My God to Thee.”




                   1.   Propius, O Deus mi, propius ad
                          Te,
                        Etiamsi crux erit quæ tollat
                          me:
                        Canam continue—
                        Mi Deus, prope Te;
                        Propius, O Deus mi, propius ad
                          Te.

                   2.   Erroni noctu quamvis similis,
                        Quiescam super stratum
                          lapidis,—
                        Delectat esse me
                        In somnis prope Te;
                        Propius, O Deus mi, propius ad
                          Te.

                   3.   Ut scalae tunc ad coelos via
                          sit;
                        Quaecunque mihi des, clementiâ
                          fit:
                        Sunto coelicolae;
                        Nutantes vocent me,
                        Propius, O Deus mi, propius ad
                          Te.

                   4.   Tum experrecta laude fulget
                          mens,
                        Petrosis malis “Bethel”
                          extruens:
                        Sic moeror urget me,
                        Mi Deus, prope Te,
                        Propius, O Deus mi, propius ad
                          Te.

                   5.   Si laetis pennis findens aëra.
                        Relictis stellis, petam
                          supera—
                        Quam jucundissime,
                        Cantabo—Prope Te,
                        Propius, O Deus mi, propius ad
                          Te.




                      “Rock of Ages Cleft for Me.”




                      Rupes Saeculorum, Te,
                      Pro me fissa, condam me!
                      Aquae Fons et sanguinis,
                      Duplex tui lateris,
                      Scelerum purgatio
                      Sit, et expiatio.

                      Nunquam possim exsequi,
                      Tua lex quæ mandet mi;
                      Quamvis strenuus semper sim,
                      Atque semper fleverim,
                      Hoc nil expiaverit;
                      In Te solo salus sit.

                       Nil in manu tulero;
                       Tuae cruci hæreo;
                       Vestes mihi nudo des,
                       Inopemque subleves;
                       Fonti foedus advolo;
                       Nisi laves pereo.

                       Dum vitalem haurio vim,
                       Cumque moribundus sim,
                       Quum per stellas evolem,—
                       Ante tuum thronum stem,
                       Rupes Saeculorum, Te,
                       Pro me fissa, condam me.




                       “Jesus Refuge of My Soul!”




                        O Præsidium, Jesu mi,
                        Fugiam tuo pectori:
                        Torrens propius æstuet,
                        Dum procella fureret:
                        Hoc in vitæ turbine,
                        O Salvator, tege me!
                        Fac ut tutus, integer,
                        Tecum semper commorer.

                        Soli es Refugio:
                        Tibi lassus hæreo:
                        Ne relinque solum me;
                        Sit solatium per Te.
                        Tibi dum confisus sim,
                        Plenas opes tulerim:
                        Me defende, debilem,
                        Me tutator, inopem.

                       Tu, O Jesu, mihi es
                       Omnes res optabiles:
                       Aegrum, lapsum, sublevas,
                       Opem fesso, coeco, das:
                       Facile es sanctissimus;
                       Ego sum perimprobus,
                       Fœdus, plenus scelerum—
                       Tu, bonorum omnium.

                       Gratia satis est in Te,
                       Sontem perabsolvere.
                       Fluat flumen affatim,
                       Purus ut ex toto sim.
                       Jesus, Fons vitalis es:
                       Sumam quæ benigne des:
                       Vive mi in pectore,
                       Fons Aeternat Domine!




               “Abide With Me, Fast Falls the Eventide.”




        Mecum habita, Domine! ultima labitur hora diei:
        Quam tenebrae condensantur! Tu mecum habitato!
        Deficiunt adjutores, atque omnia grata;
        Tu, qui non spernes inopes, O mecum habitato!

        Ad metam tenuis vitæ, properant rapidae horae;
        Blanditiae pereunt, et transit gloria mundi:
        Omnia mutari, corrumpique, undique vidi;
        Tu qui immutatus remanes, O mecum habitato.

        Te, Domine, est mihi nunc opus omni hora fugienti:
        Tu solus valeas hostes mihi vincere saevos:
        Tu solus firmum me, et salvum ducere possis:
        In tranquillo, in turbinibus, Tu, O mecum habitato.

        Hostes non timeo, quum Tu stas praesto beare;
        Adversi casus faciles sunt absque dolore;
        Terrores mortis, stimuli, et victoria, desunt;
        Laetatusque exsultabo, nam mecum habitabis.

        Mi juvenescenti, blandus Tu nempe favisti;
        Ah me! quam brutus! quam perversusque remansi!
        Non discessisti a me, saepe ut deserui Te:
        O Domine, usque et ad extremum, Tu mecum habitato.

        Ad oculos crucem dormitanti mihi monstra;
        Illustra tenebras, et me erige visere coelos:
        En, umbrae fugiunt! et mane rubescere coepit!
        In vita, in morte, O Domine, O Tu mecum habitato!




                    “Just as I Am Without One Plea.”




                     Sicuti sum—nec sine spe,
                     Quia Tu mortuus es pro me,
                     Et jubes ire me ad Te—
                             O Agnus Dei, venio.
                     Sicuti sum—nec haesitem,
                     Ut maculas abluerem;
                     Mundus per tuum sanguinem,
                             O Agnus Dei, venio.
                     Sicuti sum—jactatus sim,
                     Et dubitans dum conflixerim,
                     Certansque, timens, perdo vim,
                             O Agnus Dei, venio.
                     Sicuti sum—miserrime
                     Cœcus, nudusque omni re,
                     Ut omnia capiam in Te,
                             O Agnus Dei, venio.
                     Sicuti sum—recipies,
                     Purgabis, solves, eximes;
                     Nam credo quod promitteres:
                             O Agnus Dei, venio.
                     Sicuti sum—agnosco Te,
                     Salvasse per amorem me,
                     Ut tuus sim assidue:
                             O Agnus Dei, venio.




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected.

Inconsistencies in punctuation have been maintained.

A cover was created for this eBook.

[The end of _The Dying Indian's Dream_, by Silas Tertius Rand.]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Dying Indian's Dream, by Silas Tertius Rand


        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DYING INDIAN'S DREAM: A POEM ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


